Add Mastermind project (#17) (#32)
codedex-io/projects: projects/create-mastermind-game-with-python/create-mastermind-game-with-python.mdx

---
title: Create Mastermind Game with Python

> author: 3t8

Reviewer: Are you ok with using your real name here?

If so please update your name here

datePublished: 2022-11-06
description: Learn how to create Mastermind game with Python in this project tutorial
header: URL
tags:
  - beginner
  - python
---

# Create Mastermind Game with Python

<AuthorAvatar author_name="3t8" author_avatar="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/62209650" />

![Header image](URL)

**Prerequisites:** Python fundamentals
**Versions:** Python 3.10
**Read Time:** 30 minutes  

## [#](#-introduction) Introduction

> With more than 55 million units sold, [Mastermind](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mastermind_(board_game)) is a one of the world’s most popular strategy games ever. The idea behind it is to guess an unknown sequence of colored pegs in the fewest number of attempts possible. Despite having simple rules the game is still very difficult and entertaining.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With more than 55 million units sold, [Mastermind](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mastermind_(board_game)) is a one of the world’s most popular strategy games. The idea behind it is to guess an unknown sequence of colored pegs in the fewest number of attempts possible. Despite having simple rules, the game is still very difficult and entertaining.
```

> Because representing colors in a terminal is not an easy task, we are going to create a more *modern* version of the Mastermind game. In 1977 Invicta released an electronic version of the game where the colored pegs were replaced by an array of up to five digits. In this tutorial we are going to recreate it in Python.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since representing colors in a terminal is not an easy task, we are going to create a more *modern* version of the Mastermind game. In 1977 Invicta released an electronic version of the game where the colored pegs were replaced by an array of up to five digits. In this tutorial, we are going to recreate that version in Python.
```

![Invicta Electronic Master Mind](https://tomsk3000.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/200707_Electronic-Mastermind_08_lres.jpg)

## [#](#-rules) Rules

The rules are really simple:
- A random 4 digit secret code is generated

> - The player will input a 4 digit number trying to guess the secret code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The player will input a 4 digit number to try to guess the secret code
```

- The number of digits that are correct and in the right position is returned

> - The number of digits that are correct but in the wrong position is returned

Reviewer 2: Nitpick, but could you add a small note here about what "right position" and "correct" means? 
The easiest way would be to use a simple mastermind example to walk through it.

Reviewer 3: +1

## [#](#-generate-a-random-number) Step 1. Generate a Random Number

In order to generate a random number we need to use the `random` module. More specifically we are going to use `randrange` method.

```python
from random import randrange
```

The `randrange` method returns a random number within the specified range. To generate a 4 digit number we need our range to be between 0 and 10000 (the largest number generated would be 9999)

```python
number = randrange(10000)
```

There is only a small problem. If the generated number is smaller than 1000 we will end up with a secret code that has less than 4 digits.

To fix that we need to add zeroes at the beginning of the number until it reaches 4 digits.

The easiest way to do it is converting the number to a string and justify it to the right with `rjust` by adding `0` until it has `4` digits.

``` python
number = str(number).rjust(4, '0')
```

We now have our random secret code.

## [#](#-read-users-guess) Step 2. Read user's guess

> The next step is getting user's guess. To do that we will use the `input` function. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next step is getting the user's guess. To do that, we will use the `input` function. 
```

We use `isnumeric` to check that all the characters taken as input are numeric and `len(guess)` to make sure that the guess has 4 digits.

> If any of those conditions are not met, we will ask again the user for a guess.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If any of those conditions are not met, we will ask the user for a guess again.
```

We set `guess = 0` to execute the instructions inside the while the first time.

```python
guess = 0
while (guess.isnumeric() == False or len(guess) != 4):
  guess = input('Guess the four digit number: ')
```

> The `guess` read with `input` is treated as a string, same as the secret code `number`.

Reviewer 2: Isn't `number` treated as a number here, not a string?

Reviewer 3: Yes. Please change `guess = 0` to `guess = '0'`.

## [#](#-additional-variables) Step 3. Additional variables

We need a variable to count the correct digits in the right position

```python
correct_position = 0
```

> and one to count the correct digits in the wrong position

Reviewer 2: Move this to the previous line. 
"We need a variable ... in the right position and one ... wrong position.

Reviewer 2: The two variables can also be combined to one python field.

```python
correct_digit = 0
```

> We will also use a copy of `number` in order to keep track of the digits that have already been matched and the ones that are left unmatched

Reviewer 3: Missing a period.

Once again we use `range(4)` to iterate over all 4 digits.
This time the digits are compared between `guess` and `unmatched`.
We check if `guess[i] in unmatched` and if that's true we increment the `correct_digit` counter.

The `guess` variable has not been changed at all, but we **must not** check the digits that have already been matched in the right position.
That is done by also checking if `guess[i] != number[i]` (or if `unmathced[i] != 'f'`).

```python
if (guess[i] in unmatched and guess[i] != number[i]):
  unmatched = unmatched.replace(guess[i], 'f', 1)
  correct_digit += 1
```
Like the last time, the matched digits in `unmatched` are set to `f` so they will be excluded in the next iteration.

## [#](#-printing-guessed-digits-and-winning) Step 6. Printing guessed digits

At this point both `correct_position` and `correct_digit` counters should have the right values. We just need to print them.

```python
print('Digits in right position: ' + str(correct_position))
print('Digits in wrong position: ' + str(correct_digit))
```

## [#](#-counting-the-number-of-guesses-and-winning) Step 7. Counting the number of guesses and winning

> The whole code after the `number` generation needs to be inside a

Reviewer 3: Need to finish this sentence with a colon or "`white` loop as follows:"

tries = 0
guess = 0

while (guess != number):
  tries += 1
  guess = ''
  # unmatched will keep track of the digits that have not been guessed
  unmatched = number
  correct_digit = 0
  correct_position = 0
  # Read a four digit number
  while (guess.isnumeric() == False or len(guess) != 4):
    guess = input('Guess the four digit number: ')
  # Count the guessed digits in the right postion
  for i in range(4):
    if (guess[i] == number[i]):
      # Set the guessed digit to 'f' in unmatched
      unmatched = unmatched.replace(guess[i], 'f', 1)
      correct_position += 1
  # Count the guessed digits in the wrong position
  if (correct_position < 4):
    for i in range(4):
      if (guess[i] in unmatched and guess[i] != number[i]):
        # Set the guessed digit to 'f' in unmatched
        unmatched = unmatched.replace(guess[i], 'f', 1)
        correct_digit += 1
    print('Digits in right position: ' + str(correct_position))
    print('Digits in wrong position: ' + str(correct_digit))
print('You are a mastermind! You guessed the number in ' + str(tries) + ' tries')
```

## [#](#-improvements) Improvements

To improve this project you could try to:

> - Increase the number of digits the user has to guess. With 4 digits the possible permutations are 10000.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Increase the number of digits the user has to guess. With 4 digits the possible permutations are 10000, but with more digits, it would be harder for the user to guess the permutation.
```
